## Monads in Haskell

Monads are frequent in Haskell, from IO to libraries for parsing and GUI applications. They can be thought of as containers that store some value and a way of manipulating those values. As far as I can tell, these values have unconstrained type `a`, so they can be anything.
In programmatic terms, a monad in Haskell is simply a type class that requires a
type constructor for the monad and implementation of two methods 
- **return**, and 
- **>>=** (called "bind"), which is used for composing monads

In ghci,

```haskell
> :t return
return :: (Monad m) => a -> m a
```

`return` simply takes a value `a` and places it into the default monadic context . For example, the `Maybe` type is a monad (i.e. an instance of the Monad class in Haskell). It has two constructors `Just` and `Nothing`,
where `Just` is the default context that a value is placed into. 

```haskell
> return 3 :: Maybe Int
Just 3
> return Nothing
Nothing
```

Here is the IO monad:

```haskell
> let x = return 3 :: IO Int
> :t x
x :: IO Int
```

The reason you want to put values inside a context is that now, you can compose them in some interesting way (manipulate the values inside a sequence of containers) without having to worry about failure, because now we have a purely functional way of encapsulating the failure.

In the case of the `Maybe` type, failure simply means you return a `Nothing`.

Here is how `>>=` works: 

 ```haskell
 > let x = Just 3
 > let y = Just 4
 > x >>= (\t -> Just 4 >>= (\s -> return $ t + s)) 
 Just 7

 -- or in the sugarfull do notation
 do {
   t <- x
   s <- y
   return $ t + s
   }
 ```
 
 It is a function that takes a monad of type `m a` and a function of type `a -> m b` and produces something of type `m b`. `a` and `b` can have any type.
 
 Let's say `x` and `y` stored results from a function `f` that computes some math, but we want to safely deal with divide-by-zero errors, and so `f` returns `Nothing` if there is division by zero.
 
  ```haskell
 > let x = Just 3     -- succesful computation
 > let y = Nothing  -- failed computation
 > x >>= (\t -> Just 4 >>= (\s -> return $ t + s)) 
 Nothing
 ```

In the IO monad, failure throws an `error`, which is OK because you are in IO and can deal with it in some way. In the case of the list monad, failure will return an empty list. 
There are various useful built-in monads, such as the
- State monad `State s` which wraps a function `s -> (a,s)` for the encapsulated type `a`
- Writer monad `Writer w` which wraps `a` constrained to be a Monoid
- Reader monad `Reader r` which wraps a read-only value of type `a`

These have their own `runX` functions, that will spit out the encapsulated value and are generally used in the form of Monad transformers or after deriving the typeclasses (MonadState et cetera).

The implementation of `>>=` for each of these is specialized for the use of the individual monad. For example, `>>=` simply channels the read-only value through a sequence of `Reader`s.

In terms of category theory, monads are functors (in Haskell, Monads were once not a subclass of Functors for historical reasons, but GHC 7.10 seems to have changed that). Monads have two "morphisms" ("functions" in set theory) for any value `x`, which act like `return` and `>>=`.

